---
layout: post
title: Blog Post 1: What is Data Science?
---

#### What do you think being a data scientist is about?  What do you see as the major duties and/or knowledge areas?  What differences/similarities do you see between data scientists and statisticians?  How do you view yourself in relation to these two areas?

For me, a data scientist starts out with a vast array of data, applies a variety of techniques to make sense of that data, and uses the data to tell a compelling story to a diverse audience which may include fellow data scientists, subject matter experts who have domain knowledge but not necessarily the same mathematical background, or laypersons getting to know the subject matter for the first time.

As mentioned in the assigned reading data science blogs, data science requires a combination of mathematics/statistics knowledge, programming skills, and domain/industry subject matter expertise. In addition to these skills, I think what makes a good data scientist is the ability to ask the right questions and the capacity to tell an interesting story with the data. In academia, a study or experiment is designed often with a specific question in mind, and the scientists/statisticians apply the appropriate techniques to best answer that question. In industry, the questions are usually more open-ended: data scientists are given a pile of data and asked to make sense of it.

To get effective results, a data scientist has to engage with relevant stakeholders (which may not necessarily be the originators of the data) to discover the essential questions that drive improvement; these may include ways in which the data can help increase efficiency of an existing process, improve customer satisfaction in an underserved market, or upend some bit of conventional wisdom that no longer reflects reality. In communicating one's findings from the data, a data scientist has to tailor their message according to the audience. When speaking with fellow data scientists, the discussion can be on feature engineering as well as model selection, tuning, and interpretability. Talking to non-technical folks in the industry, the message can focus on predictive results or actionable insights. To a general audience, the story can perhaps be about a surprising finding from the data and how it reconciles with popular understanding. Engaging with such a diverse cross-section of people can be challenging, but is also part of the fun of data science.

To me, data science and statistics share many of the same mathematical and programming requirements, but data science also requires communication skills necessary to connect with stakeholders to understand the key questions to ask, as well as the ability tell a compelling story backed up by data and evidence. As an aspiring data scientist, I applied to the Online MS program to shore up my stats knowledge, but I am also mindful to the very important soft skills to develop in order to succeed in data science.
